ANSALDO CITY OF CULTURES
Location: Milan, Italy. 2000-.
In Association With: F&P Architetti.
The proposal for a campus of museums and 'City of Cultures' is located within a block of disused industrial buildings on the site of the former Ansaldo factory in Milan. Inspired by the typical Milanese condition of quiet, sombre street facades concealing beautiful, intricate courtyards, the project looked to emphasise the inevitable internalised quality of the existing site. As a formal intervention within an informal industrial complex, the proposal looked to accept and build upon these inherent characteristics through both the restoration of the existing industrial buildings and the introduction of a new and distinct central building as a focal point for the network of connections that the perimeter of the site encloses.
The programme for Ansaldo forms a mixture of both public and private facilities. Housed within the newly restored factory buildings will be Milan's Archaeological Museum (relocated into a single structure from the two buildings it currently occupies in the city centre), Centre for Advanced Studies of Visual Arts, and a workshop for a traditional puppet's company. Alongside these existing buildings, and providing the main intervention on the site, will be the new Centre for Non-European Cultures. Containing a museum, archive and study centre, the building is distinguished by its free-form, organic central hall, forming an internal courtyard (or court within a court) for both the Centre and the site as a whole.
Due to the tight surrounding context of the factory block, the surfaces of this new building have effectively been inverted. The spaces they enclose and adjoin are turned inside-out and outside-in, so that the representational space of the building is a more random assemblage of volumes reminiscent of the other industrial structures located within the complex. The spaces in between, become part of a formal sequence of external courts and passages, intertwining new and old architectures within the inner world of the Ansaldo block.
FIGGE ART MUSEUM
Location: Davenport, Iowa, USA. 1999-.
In Association With: Herbert Lewis Kruse Blunck Architecture.
The centre of Davenport, located on the banks of the Mississippi on Iowa's eastern border, suffers from many of the problems endemic to a number of American cities. Over the years the area has witnessed the departure of much of its residential and business communities leaving downtown Davenport with little of the vibrancy normally associated with urban life. In an attempt to reinvigorate this area, and recreate a connection to the river, the city identified the relocation and re-housing of the Davenport Museum of Art (renamed the Figge Art Museum) as the catalyst in a programme of urban regeneration.
Identifying a wish to create some kind of emblematic building for the new city, the design of the Figge Art Museum was conceived as a monolithic glass structure that would powerfully yet simply landmark Davenport's redeveloped waterfront. Its architecture was based around the idea of a simple volumetric block enveloped by opaque, transparent and translucent surfaces. These glass surfaces are fitted with horizontal banding that varies in density so as to define each of the Center's formal elements.
In urban terms, the design looked to support the old city grid by filling one half of a previously empty city block. While maintaining a strong and singular outline the design of the Center reveals itself as more varied than its urban footprint would suggest - different frontages reflect differing site conditions and define each of the building's facades with distinct approaches; city plaza, street entrance, and riverside terrace.
Inside the building the programme for its design and layout is based largely on the existing Davenport Museum of Art with its rich mix of exhibition and supporting functions with the inclusion of educational spaces, drawing and study rooms, lecture and library facilities. The proposed design encourages the overlap of these public functions providing a public route through the building, giving visitors an awareness of the activities of the Figge Art Museum and for students and artists to have an immediate relationship with the collection of paintings and objects that it houses.
DES MOINES PUBLIC LIBRARY
Location: Des Moines, Iowa, USA. 2001-.
In Association With: Herbert Lewis Kruse Blunck Architecture.
The library will form an integral part of the new Des Moines 'Western Gateway Park'. This area of the city has been scheduled for intensive brown field regeneration and the new library and park will become a centrepiece for the urban renewal of Des Moines.
Located at the east end of the park the new library acts as a link between downtown Des Moines and the park. On the one hand, it responds to the city block, but at the same time it also stretches out into the parkland, floating in the surrounding landscape, thus creating outside spaces of different character while conveying to the visitor the feeling of sitting in the park while reading a book.
The Gateway Gallery, a flexible activity space, forms part of a public route through the building, reinforcing its bridging character between the park and the city and blending the threshold between library and park.
The two story concrete structure sits above an underground car park and is entirely wrapped in an innovative energy efficient glass skin. Laminated between two glass surfaces, a layer of expanded copper mesh reduces the glare level and solar gain, greatly reducing long-term energy costs. The mesh is the only sun-shading device necessary, ensuring that the view from the inside into the park is maintained at all times. Slight variations in the make up of the panels provide the library with a differentiated yet uniform skin, emphasising the organic shape of the building.
In addition to book stacks, the library also accommodates education facilities, children's play areas and a conference wing with a café, reinforcing the public nature of the building and providing a platform for public life. Administration and back of house services are to be found in the east wing. The stacks are arranged in such a way that one will always be able to see into the park thus creating a sense of openness and transparency.
KNIGHT HOUSE ADDITION
Location: Richmond, Surrey, United Kingdom. 2001.
In 1990 David Chipperfield Architects completed a house for the photographer Nick Knight and his family in Richmond, Surrey, extending and reworking an existing 1950s suburban house. Over the last ten years, however, with the photographer's family expanding, this first house consequently needed to be extended, providing additional living, working, and storage space, as well as the opportunity to enlarge the rear garden.
Early designs for this second building initially explored the possibility of extending the architectural language of the first 1990 house, but this approach was soon rejected as the unity and coherence of the original project became obscured. Finding an architecture that would exist on its own and in tandem with the older house was complicated further by the sensitive planning environment.
In response to these reservations, the architectural concept for the new addition placed an archetypal house form (with a pitched roof and two gabled ends) alongside the original house. This new element was then connected to the existing house via an abstracted glass box. Clad in translucent fibreglass shutters, this connecting piece provides a link to the older house at both floors, as well as accomodating a bathroom and storage spaces. Accessed through this volume are the two rooms of the new house, one on top of the other - giving a sense of openness exaggerated further by the large bedroom window which slides vertically to transform the upper room into a balcony. In this way, the themes established in the original project - of space, light, and view - are continued in this addition, continuing the spirit of the existing house while pursuing and introducing a different figurative idea.
GORMLEY STUDIO
Location: London, United Kingdom. 2001-2003.
This design for a new studio for the English artist Antony Gormley is located amid the industrial buildings, warehouses, and rail yards just north of London's Kings Cross station. Attempting to create light and open spaces for the diverse and specific ways in which the artist works, the building provides studio space for drawing, painting, sculpting, welding, casting, and photography.
A former Turner prize winner, and an artist whose work has been exhibited in museums and as installations all over the world, Antony Gormley has created some of the most ambitious and recognisable sculptural works of the past two decades, including Field, The Angel of the North, and Quantum Cloud on the river Thames in Greenwich. With the increasing interest in his work, Antony Gormley required a space that would be large enough to construct his often huge installations, yet at the same time would also be somewhere intimate and personal enough in which he could conceive his next artistic projects.
Looking to satisfy both of these requirements, the design of the proposed studio references and abstracts the large scale, industrial architectural vernacular of the surrounding buildings. The building is distinguished by the silhouette of its pitched roofs and its bright but even interior light. Located to the rear of its site, the studio building itself is approached across a large yard, left open for the assembling of bigger pieces. A pair of galvanised steel staircases connect this yard to the domestic-scale studio and office areas on the upper floor.
Operating as both a workshop and as a paired down, white-walled studio space, the building will become the focus for all of Antony Gormley's artistic production, and will sensitively yet pragmatically edify a collaborative effort between artist and architect.
HOUSE IN MANHATTAN
Location: New York, USA. 2001-2003.
In Association With: Richard Lewis Architects.
The project to renovate a five storey 19th Century brownstone house in New York's West Village concentrated on the idea of connecting all floors. By the introduction of a sculptural open stair in the centre of the house the different living areas are connected together into a 'vertical loft'.
The solid oak stair, folding and twisting, connects the cellar kitchen to the roof deck, passing through a dining room, drawing room, library and bedroom, providing views and light to the centre of the house.
The material palette of the house is reduced to emphasise the lightness of the rooms and the central importance of the wooden stair. It becomes an object of great material presence. Wall surfaces, enclosures and other elements are all treated as blocks or planes which are made of a single material.
PARKSIDE APARTMENTS
Location: Berlin, Germany. 2001/2004.
Parkside Apartments gains its name from its exclusive location directly on the Tiergarten park in the centre of Berlin. The ten-storey apartment building forms the northern border of a new hotel, office and residential development, Beisheim Center on Postdamer Platz.
The building accommodates 36 apartments ranging from 150 sqm to 300 sqm. All apartments have several balconettes and generous loggias. The principle of high flexibility forms the basis for the design. The spectrum of possible floor plans spans from traditional, to closed, to flowing room concepts. The apartments on the 9th floor are planned as maisonettes, and their upper floors provide access to the roof terrace, offering far-reaching views over the centre of Berlin. Public facilities are planned for the ground floor, such as cafes, restaurants and shops. The main entrance to the apartment block is located in the centre of these facilities. On entering the building via a natural stone clad wall, one reaches the lobby with views of the landscaped garden through generous windows. The stairwell with lifts are located at each end of the lobby, each leading to two apartments on each floor.
The facade is composed of large, irregular roughly sanded slabs of natural shell limestone, giving the building a monolithic character. French windows form the basic facade module. Together with the balconettes and their glass balustrades, these windows emphasise the plasticity and free composition of the facade.
SOCIAL HOUSING IN MADRID
Location: Villaverde, Madrid, Spain. 2001-.
In Association With: J.M. Fernández Isla & M.M. Santolaya Heredero.
Commissioned by the Empresa Municipal de la Vivienda, the project for a social housing scheme is located in a new development in the Villaverde district of southern Madrid. Comprised of 176 one-, two- and three-bedroom apartments, the scheme responds to an overall masterplan for the site which requested a single U-shaped block, 15m deep, and with a footprint of just over 2,000m². Like other buildings within the same development, it also required that the block be eight stories high and have the appearance of a pitched roof. Within the confines of this brief, the design attempted to manipulate these architectural restrictions so as to abstract the normative idea of an apartment block. So whereas other neighbouring buildings adopt a symmetrical, double-pitched silhouette, the traditional relationships of wall and roof are abstracted into a low, single pitch for the bulk of the block, and a small secondary pitch bevelling the building's front edge.
The increase in floor area achieved by this reduction in roof volume allowed for higher floor to ceiling spaces and a more sculptural approach to the building envelope. The sides of the block have been carved away from the orthogonal, to create a more varied outline to the building's elevation. All plans of the apartments are arranged to allow for dual aspect and natural ventilation. Further distinguished by its choice of materials - earthy-pink concrete facade panels, slate blue concrete for the courtyard portico, and a dense band of landscaping in between, the effect is a rich panel of colours radiating outwards.
Like the building's overall form, the surface of the block also evolved from a predetermined set of limitations. These emerged from the desire to create both an hierarchical facade and one in which the fenestration does not repeat itself over the building's eight floors. A three-dimensional study into mass and form, the design of the plot represents a two-dimensional exercise in patterning.
ACCESS TO THE PASEO DEL OVALO, TERUEL
Location: Spain. 2001-2003.
In Association With: B720 Arquitectura.
The project consists of reforming the access from the railway station to the Paseo del Ovalo, an historic promenade built on the site of the city walls. The promenade is one of the many sensitive monuments in this world heritage city. The immediate environment leading to the promenade has been improved with the addition of planting, street furniture and upgrading the quality of finishes and providing additional lighting.
Passengers choosing not to climb the ornate neo-Mudejar style stairway leading to the Paseo proceed along a defined pathway through a hard landscape, to a tall new cavity inserted into the city wall. This constricts to a tighter opening within the depth of the wall and leads to the elevator lobby, which is top-lit via the glazed elevator shaft which pierces through to the upper level.
A sensitive approach meant that new materials could be absorbed without destroying the original qualities of the monument.
BBC SCOTLAND
Location: Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom. 2001-.
The project for the new BBC Scotland headquarters at Pacific Quay, Glasgow, is located alongside the abandoned Govan docks on an exposed plot of land dominated by the expanse of the river Clyde and the mountains of the Scottish Highlands to the north. Faced with this open landscape, the design of the building had to find ways to establish its own sense of place and satisfy the demands of the BBC for a contained yet publicly accessible building.
The resulting proposal aimed to create a building distinct from conventional offices; more industrial loft-like in feel, it gives equal importance to collective work areas, individual work stations and public spaces. Accordingly the central atrium is configured as a tiered sequence of platforms and terraces, visible through glass wall from the outside. Circulation and communication through the building and between office floors is accentuated by the giant staircase, which not only offers informal meeting areas, but encourages movement between spaces, giving powerful visual representation to the public aspect of the building.
In terms of the formal composition, the most immediate problem posed by the project brief lay in the relationship between technical elements such as studios and office spaces. The juxtaposition between the solidity and size of the studios in contrast to the adjoining office spaces, which require transparency to enjoy the surrounding views, was the most difficult formal issue raised by the programme. The response throughout all of the design decisions was to integrate each of the building's elements, avoiding a back-of-house atmosphere for technical areas, and the compartmentalisation of common spaces, so that the building as a whole can absorb and reveal the diversity of its uses.
CITY OF JUSTICE, BARCELONA
Location: Barcelona, Spain. 2002-.
In Association With: B720 Arquitectura.
Currently, the various departments of Barcelona & L'Hospitalet de Llobregat are scattered in 17 buildings placed across the two cities, with functional frustrations for both users and employees. A new conjoined City of Justice will improve efficiency and allow working spaces to adapt and absorb the constant transformation of the judicial body along with reserve space for future growth.
The site is at the border of the two cities of Barcelona and L'Hospitalet de Llobregat on a site which was previously a military barracks. It is located adjacent to both Gran Via, a major access route into the centre of Barcelona, and Carilet, an artery leading to L'Hospitalet. The position provides optimum accessibility to the city and major metropolitan routes, on both public and private transport.
The most significant proposition breaks up the massive programme requirements (330,000m²) into a series of separate but inter-related buildings on a public plaza, giving a spatial composition which attempts to break the rigid and monolithic image of justice. This proposal also attempts to provide an equilibrium to the relationships between the different working areas, public areas and landscape. A group of the six main judicial buildings are situated around the perimeter of a top-lit atrium building and generally contain courtrooms at ground floor and three further floors. All of these floors are accessed directly from the atrium which acts as a filter.
The eleven independent buildings are restrained blocks with load bearing concrete cage facades. The concrete will be coloured with an exposed aggregate finish. The atrium building has a more free form plan with 1 metre deep exposed concrete slabs and woven mesh shading screens in front of frameless glazing. The atrium roof will have two metre deep section concrete beams as a shading system over the main public room for the complex.

HOTEL IN HAMBURG
Location: Hamburg, Germany. 2002.
The investigations for this project were inspired by the extraordinary nature and history of the Bavaria grounds—a famous former industrial brewery compound overlooking the river Elbe. Its exclusive position as the largest industrial workplace within Hamburg's inner city area requires particular consideration, being situated between two highly divergent city areas—Hamburg's inner city, represented by its prominent townhouses and trade buildings to the east, and St. Pauli's small-scale 19th century buildings to the west and north.
The site can be regarded as an urban vacuum where new development needs to take up a mediating role between the different urban situations, which are now being placed in a new relationship with one another. In contrast to the previous introverted nature of the site, the design of the hotel complex attempts to create both programmatic and architectural references to the neighbouring surroundings. Thus, the 21-storey building complex consists of different staggered volumes, where the height of each volume corresponds with the eaves of the surrounding buildings. Whereas the base of the complex with its new public square refers both in scale and content to the St. Pauli neighbourhood, the hotel tower with its 330 hotel rooms rises above the normal city, creating a visual landmark for Hamburg's skyline. From the direction of the water it appears as a slim, vertical volume, fitting into the topography of the famous 'crown of the harbour', a series of impressive turn-of-the-century buildings along the embankment of the river Elbe.
The glass-bronze facade is structured with a post-beam construction, which emphasises the vertical. It covers the buildings as a homogenous layer, unifying the different volumes and providing a subtle backdrop for the neighbouring architecture.
MUSEUM OF MODERN LITERATURE
Location: Marbach am Neckar, Germany. 2002-.
This museum will be completed and officially opened on the anniversary of the German dramatist Friedrich von Schiller's birthday (10 November 2005). It is located in the civic park of Marbach, Schiller's birthplace, on top of a rock plateau overlooking the picturesque valley of the Neckar River. The new museum will stand alongside the German Literature Archive, the National Schiller Museum, and a monument to the writer. Displaying and archiving works of 20th century literature, notably the original manuscripts of Franz Kafka's The Trial and Alfred Döblin's Berlin Alexanderplatz, the museum will also provide panoramic views across and over the far distant landscape.
By means of a sequence of terraces, the architectural concept for the museum proposes to connect the park level to the lower forecourt of the Schiller Museum. In this way, by utilising the steep slope of the site, the terraces create two very different characters—an intimate, shaded entrance on the brow of the hill, and a grander, more open series of tiered spaces facing the valley below.
Entered from its highest point, the pavilion-like interiors of the museum therefore reveal themselves as one descends through the display spaces. Inside, the exhibition level consists of a mixture of halls and galleries of varying proportions and alternating ceiling heights. Housing and displaying fragile and sensitive works, such as manuscripts, transcripts and catalogues, these spaces are contained in the lower part of the building, in timber-panelled rooms illuminated only by artificial light. At the same time, each of these environmentally controlled spaces borders onto a naturally lit gallery, so as to balance views inward to the composed, internalised world of texts and manuscripts with the green and scenic valley on the other side of the windows.
MIAMI HOUSE
Location: Miami, USA. 2002.
The site is to the west side of the Miami Beach peninsula, adjacent to a series of private islands and bounded on two sides by water with views to the south. Located on the side, the house takes advantage of the water and views to the south. The first of the two buildings provides a visual barrier to and from the street, creating a courtyard space with a degree of privacy. The two-storey residence block opens onto the terrace pool which extends to the south edge of the site. On the ground floor the kitchen, dining area and pool are linked to the living area and terrace on the first floor. This connection of public rooms creates a separation between the guest rooms and the master suite. Each of the private areas is open to the south and west views, but maintain a degree of privacy from the public areas of the residence.
The house is raised on a one-meter high plinth to meet requirements of the local flood plain. This plinth establishes horizontality with a monolithic expression. The solid and massive materials regulate the climate of the house, keeping the spaces cool while providing shade. The openings formed between the slabs are glazed with large sliding doors. The glass is set back along the south and west elevations of the building creating open decks which, on temperate days, will assist natural ventilation.
RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX, ATHLONE HOUSE
Location: London, United Kingdom. 1996/2002.
The location for the apartment buildings lies within the former hospital site of Athlone House and borders London's Hampstead Heath. The new masterplan for the site consists of a number of components that include the re-establishment of Athlone House as a single residential entity, the reconstruction of peripheral buildings significant to Hampstead Lane to the north of the site, and the incorporation of new apartments buildings within the eastern section of the site. These new and retained elements reside within a new landscaped context that builds on the existing qualities of the site while responding to the strong presence of the Heath beyond.
The apartments take the form of three separate buildings, three villas in a landscape. Their placement is driven by the desire to re-establish views towards the Heath from Hampstead Lane. This is achieved by a new garden foreground between Athlone House and the new apartment buildings to the east.
The three-dimensional composition of the building is a consequence of the immediate topography and the desire to retain a number of large tree specimens. Lower roof heights to the north of the site address heights of the existing buildings and the semi-rural scale of Hampstead Lane. Taller volumes are positioned deeper into the site where the ground slopes away to the Heath.
Within the buildings, the arrangement of apartments utilises a single core to serve multiple units on a given floor. Entrances to each apartment are reached by a lobby connected to lifts and stairs. Each apartment is organised around a central hall offering access to all rooms. The living and dining areas are located at the extremities of each building with large terraces situated at the corners of the buildings. The thick wall used for the external facade is employed as either storage depth within rooms or to generate deep-set floor-to-ceiling windows that provide balconies for bedrooms.
The form and shape of the buildings and the differing window conditions conceive the overall arrangement as a family of three sculptural blocks. Using fine ashlar stone as a single material, the project aims to establish a carved-out quality. A large house typology furthered by chimney stacks and recessed entrances places the project firmly within the context of Hampstead and Highgate's long domestic heritage.
BAILUJUN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Location: Liangzhu Cultural Village, China. 2003.
Bailujun is a residential district of a new town, Liangzhu Cultural Village, located two hours drive from Shanghai. The district is situated on a plain between a range of hills in the west and a river in the east. The urban motif of the design is developed from the prevailing residential structures in China of north-south oriented residential housing rows and the rural style of architecture placed on stone bases. Fourteen islands of residential blocks are located freely on the plain between the country road and the riverbank.
By turning the residential blocks slightly from one another, flowing public spaces are created, thus integrating the landscape into the district. Each individual block incorporates eight 3-5 storey apartment buildings, forming a coherent complex placed on a common base and creating structured and clearly legible neighbourhoods. Each block contains approximately 60 apartments. The stone base, which accommodates a common garage and forms a second, private garden level is integrated into the designed landscape. The buildings placed on this base form a central courtyard, providing the apartments with an attractive view into the leafy garden and reinforcing their relationship with nature.
The height of the buildings and their positions on the base vary. Wide open staircases cut into the base, provide the main access and introduce a degree of permeability to the block. All rooms in the apartments have storey-high doors and French windows, thus creating flowing spaces within the apartments themselves and between the interior and exterior.
LIANGZHU CULTURE MUSEUM
Location: China. 2003.
Liangzhu Culture Museum is situated on the embankment of the valley plain, characterised by water. The composition of the not perfectly parallel bar-formed volumes resembles the image of excavated awls, reminiscent of historic findings. On approaching the museum via the road or on foot through the park valley landscape, the sculptural quality of the building composed in the artificial topography reveal itself to the visitor. The views framed by the plants and water surfaces in the longitudinal direction of the valley enhance this compositional approach.
The volumes allow for artificially lit exhibition galleries, which due to their length achieve a well-proportioned room cross-section in spite of the large floor space of the halls. An obvious sequence of the exhibits is supported by the linearity of the exhibition galleries. At the end of the linear exhibition galleries a belvedere provides a view of the surrounding landscape. Through a form of inversion, the views through the park are brought into the interior of the museum and provide the artificially lit museum with a reference to nature and daylight.
The arrangement of the volumes enables a slow ascent from the entrance via the permanent galleries to the temporary exhibition hall above the entrance area. The views gain height and spatial drama accordingly.
The interstitial spaces between the long exhibition halls provide day-lit circulation. In spite of the linearity of the museum, a great complexity of possible individual routes is created. The auxiliary functions are situated beneath the exhibition volumes, whilst the park with its island continues the museum programme.
BAMBOO FOREST VILLAGE CLUBHOUSE
Location: Liangzhu Cultural Village, China. 2003-.
Bamboo Forest Village Clubhouse is located in Bamboo Forest Village, a district of a new town, Liangzhu Cultural Village in the southeast of China. The town is a new development with residential, entertainment and holiday areas. Each district of Liangzhu Cultural Village is marked by a public gathering place, in this case the Bamboo Village Clubhouse, which is on the bank of a small lake, surrounded by a bamboo forest and a landscaped garden. The qualities of the site form the basis for the design of the building. Views of the surrounding nature are framed by generous openings in the stone facade of the clubhouse, which provide a contrast to the large wall surfaces. As a lightly folded surface structure, the building follows the softly undulating surrounding landscape.
The clubhouse is situated on the crossing point between the riverbank promenade and a footbridge, thus providing a transitory, open space for the inhabitants of the district. The building accommodates a restaurant, a tearoom, café, exhibition rooms and an events room. The crossing point divides these functions into three main volumes and allows the visitor to freely traverse the building without entering the interior volumes. Lakeside terraces and water gardens reinforce the idea of a communicative and lively gathering place.
RESIDENTIAL TOWERS, CENTRAL HUAIHAI ROAD
Location: Shanghai, China. 2002.
Central Huaihai Road is one of Shanghai's most popular and rapidly developing streets, reflecting the energy and the enormous speed at which the entire city is currently growing. Located in the heart of the French Quarter the street has a healthy mixture of retail and residential facilities enriched by local amenities. The program of this project, located towards the west of the city centre and Central Huaihai Road is predominantly based on the growing demand of these facilities.
Three residential towers rise from a linear 'snake-like' base, which accommodates luxury retail space and restaurants on several floors with a health and leisure club occupying the top floor, offering roof gardens and outdoor pools. On the north west side, towards Central Huaihai Road, the linear base forms an open lower courtyard, maximising exposure of the shop front areas, whilst on the south east side a more protected and private residential courtyard provides exclusive access to the residential towers. The masterplan also identifies the size and location of a music hall towards the south.
The towers house three different apartment types of 150m², 300m² and 500m² area, which are arranged in such a way that there will only be one entrance per floor. All apartments are fully glazed and open on to a wintergarden space. Horizontal adjustable glass louvers with a semi-transparent print pattern provide shelter and privacy for the wintergarden, whilst still allowing encompassing views onto Shanghai's spectacular skyline. This glass skin wraps in subtle variations around the entire ensemble, emphasising the sculptural character of the project.
JOSE VASCONCELOS LIBRARY
Location: Mexico. 2003. [Competition. Third Prize]
The project for the new José Vasconcelos Library sets new ambitions for a public library. The proposal is founded upon the promotion of accessibility, whilst also addressing the normal concerns of control and security. As an institution that normally suffers from an image of elitism, the importance of the new library is guaranteed by the desire to create a public place and destination and to bring the public across the threshold into it. To act as a public, social and educational catalyst the library must aim for a level of openness and accessibility, giving the building a clear mandate.
The library's relationship with the city, not just that of the object itself (the building) but also the design and consideration of its public space, defines its identity as a public building. The boundary at the edge of the building is not one of public space and chaos meeting the security and control of the public institution, rather the design looks to disperse this threshold by graduating the definition of 'outside' and 'inside'.
Two devices characterize this strategy; firstly the library terrace, forming a sort of semi-public frontage, allows the library to spill outside into this protected public space and creates informal areas and access overlooking the public square; secondly the creation of a central zone that runs the length of the building. This zone, mostly public at ground level and forming the library 'street', creates an informal heart of the building at each level, offering a casual atmosphere of sitting, browsing and interacting. This central zone is flanked on the west and east sides by the collections and study areas.
A fundamental characteristic of the proposal is its volumetric representation. The proposal presents at the same time the large scale of the library and the intention to break down this scale. The composition of the library mediates between the individual and the city, resolving this apparent contradiction of scale by breaking down the library into many smaller volumes. In this manner the building presents itself as a more open structure, questioning the monolithic nature of most institutions.
THE LIBRARY STREET The library collections are situated above the ground level—which is given to 'public' functions. The visitor arrives at the library 'street', a sort of lobby stretching the entire length of the building and follows this street to appropriate information area or vertical circulation. The street is envisaged as an overview of the library's activities. Display, information desks and reading areas inhabit this street. Voids and stairs open vistas to the public activities on the ground level and to the library levels above. The street establishes the organization of the library as a balance between vertical and horizontal circulation and between the grand vision and magnificence of the institution and the creation of a humane and intimate place to study and read.
COLCHESTER VISUAL ARTS CENTRE
Location: Colchester, United Kingdom. 2004. [Competition. Second Prize]
The competition site is at the heart of the ancient Roman town of Colchester, fifty miles northeast of London. The brief was for a Visual Arts Centre to house temporary galleries for a variety of media, a permanent gallery for a collection of contemporary Latin American art and facilities for educational and community functions.
A series of art spaces are housed in a collection of solid volumes inside a glass box. All other social and cultural activities are to be found between these internal volumes and the skin of the building. The art is 'protected' and the activity visible. The building hovers over Roman ruins that exist on the site, with parts of the ruins revealed and presented within the public foyer spaces.
The main presentation spaces are located at the heart of the building on the first floor and the Latin American Galleries on the second. The galleries will have large windows to allow daylight into exhibition spaces for those events where daylight is desirable. The spaces are five metres tall, and can be configured as a series of interconnecting rooms or as larger more open spaces depending on the nature of the exhibits.
At the top of the building, a temporary exhibition space is located with views across Colchester. This space is envisaged as a glass box that confronts the artist with issues of openness and enclosure.
The form and placement of building creates and encloses a new public square. Visitors are encouraged to enter from all sides with the ground floor being permeable, visible and animated. The public space extends from outside the building and is continued throughout.

CITY UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG MULTI MEDIA BUILDING
Location: Hong Kong, China. 2003.
The proposal for the Multi-Media building for the City University of Hong Kong represents a new type of open and social environment that has been made possible by the miniaturisation and portability of digital technology. The building's programme combines the activities of the academic community—the School of Creative Media and the Computer Engineering Department—a Digital and Media Museum, and an auditorium. The interior organisation of the building provides generous circulation, places where students, staff and the public can exchange ideas and feel part of a creative community.
The building form is inspired by its hilltop location and the existence of large monolithic stone blocks of the surrounding mountains. The building is the amalgamation of four rock-like volumes. The first contains a series of support spaces and acts as a retaining wall against the steep adjacent hillside. The other volumes are arranged and sculpted to house the remaining accommodation, which includes the 'black box' spaces, and form the internal hub and circulation spaces. The gaps at the intersections of the volumes create the entrances for both students and public. The facades of the building volumes reflect the nature of the activity within its walls. Panels of glass vary in opacity according to the requirements of the space behind. The overall sculptural form of the building seeks to echo the dominant rock formations of the surrounding landscape while its animated skin reflects the contemporary digital culture of Hong Kong.
THE HEPWORTH GALLERY
Location: Wakefield, United Kingdom. 2003. [Competition. First Prize]
The competition dealt with the relocation and expansion of the Wakefield City Art Gallery to the headland of the River Calder at the southern gateway to the City. The Gallery's existing collection contains major British and European artists and will additionally house the gift of thirty plaster works by the locally born Barbara Hepworth. The existing Gallery, housed in a late-Victorian townhouse, contains a series of small domestic rooms for the collection that provided the starting point for our investigations.
The desire to establish a new home for the collection led to the proposal of an internal sequence of small-scaled interconnected rooms for the collection and ancillary public spaces. While maintaining a consistent character, these rooms would differ in their proportion and location of openings; roof lights for natural light and side windows to provide views and orientation to the outside.
The river setting and surrounding industrial character provides the context for the new Gallery. The former cloth and grain industries of Wakefield have left a number of finely scaled and positioned buildings along the water's edge. The response to this urban setting reflects this built scale by organising the building into a series of smaller components that could respond to different conditions around the new Gallery.
The integration of these internal and external ideas resulted in a conglomeration of objects. The precise grouping of these trapezoidal blocks establish a redefined bank along the river's informal edge while generating a more orthogonal facade opposite neighbouring buildings to the south. Sloped roofs and different heights articulate the individual blocks while manipulating the new Gallery's combined roofline to funnel natural light back to the galleries inside.
VILANOVA APARTMENTS
Location: Vilanova i la Geltrú, Barcelona, Spain. 2003. In Association With: B720 Arquitectura.
The design for the apartment buildings at Vilanova i la Geltru consists of four buildings running from the newly created Placa Mediterrania to Carrer de Ferrer i Vidal. Following a given volumetric composition as prescribed by the master plan, a 90 cm thick 'wall' unites the four components and gives a strong architectural expression. The 'wall' is composed of pre-cast concrete panels in three tones, utilised as large building blocks placed upon one another and creating a tectonic language. The 'wall' is punctuated by openings of various sizes—in some places the glass is flush to provide windows, in others it is recessed to create loggias, and where the building faces open space the concrete elements project to form balconies. The composition of the building blocks and openings establishes a play of projection, creating light and shadow.
As part of the Masterplan for the Espai Pielli, the buildings are at a pivotal position between the new Placa Mediterrania and the old town. The 'wall' follows the perimeter of the site, and mediates between the orthogonal arrangement of the Masterplan and the more fragmented nature of the existing built fabric. Two of the buildings face the Placa Mediterrania, giving enclosure to the space, with an entrance between them. The concrete blocks and large openings give a sense of scale and proportion to the Placa. At the far end, two buildings are set back to create an entrance from the old town into the new area.
APARTMENT ON PORTLAND PLACE
Location: London, United Kingdom. 2004.
This family home is a converted apartment in an early 20th century mansion block on Portland Place in London. The oblong shape of the existing footprint receives ample daylight provided by light wells and courtyards. The entrance is situated in the middle of this elongated plan and demarcates a clear division between the private and the communal quarters. All of the main spaces are organised by a series of architectural elements of built-in joinery. The communal area features a sequence of glass cabinets, which divide seating, dining, cooking and study areas, yet it unifies the spaces thematically. These glass cases act as wall and storage space simultaneously, while their transparent nature allows for visual communication between the kitchen and all other areas. Moreover, they encapsulate part of the building structure while their geometric configuration forges simple volumetric room shapes out of an irregular floor plan. All of the private areas have built-in elements, providing bathroom, bed and storage spaces.
The entire apartment has been covered with a fumed oak floor, enabling a spatial continuum. Kitchen surfaces and islands are made of white Corian, lending them a monolithic feel. The display cabinet consists of a powder-coated aluminium structure covered with clear glass. The sanitary and kitchenware has been selected from the White and Silver range designed by David Chipperfield Architects.
The overriding concept of the project is to organise the domestic daily life of a large family into an apparent order without resorting to the minimalist device of concealment. Rather the object and activities of daily living are celebrated and given their place within the discipline of a reduced architectural strategy.